Proposal: Canton Payment Streams (#94)
canton-foundation/canton-dev-fund: proposals/canton-payment-streams.md

- ambiguity about whether promised funds are actually reserved

It is especially well-suited to:

- LP incentive programs
- vesting schedules
- grants and launch distributions
- fixed-term validator retainers
- milestone escrow
- prepaid subscriptions
- treasury-budgeted campaigns

#### B. Non-Prefunded / Rolling Top-Up Streams

The project also includes a non-prefunded path for open-ended recurring flows:

- streams can remain active without locking the full lifetime amount upfront
- the sender maintains funding through top-ups or rolling funded balance
- withdrawals remain bounded by what has actually been funded and accrued
- the design improves capital efficiency without relying on unsecured off-ledger credit assumptions

This model is better suited to:

- open-ended subscriptions
- recurring infrastructure billing
- ongoing service retainers
- long-lived incentive programs
- metered or usage-shaped recurring payment relationships

The proposal does not treat prefunded and non-prefunded streams as competing ideas. It treats them as two valid payment models that fit different Canton-native use cases.

### 2. Reference Assets and Settlement Boundary

> The initial reference asset paths are:

Reviewer: Why not target any CIP-056 asset? Especially as the V2 of the token standard is being developed it would be serious short coming of a Canton payment streams library if it did not target the token standard.

Author: We do support all CIP56 Assets but as an example of how this works I added support for CC & USDC . We will also support V2 Tokenstandard

Reviewer: Would be great if your proposal and the SDK targeted token standard assets specifically.

- **Canton Coin**
- **USDCx**

The stream engine is designed to remain asset-agnostic, with token movement behind a narrow settlement adapter boundary. This allows the core streaming logic to stay reusable while the surrounding token transfer mechanics remain configurable.

### 3. Core Contract Design

The core reference contracts are:

- **StreamEscrow**
  Holds sender, recipient, optional observers, token reference, deposited amount, withdrawn amount, timing configuration, stream mode, and status.

- **StreamGroup**
  Groups related streams for batch workflows such as LP incentive campaigns or payroll-like distributions.

### 4. Stream Types

Supported stream types:

- `Linear`
- `CliffLinear`
- `Stepped`
- `RenewableTerm`

These cover the main partner-requested flows for incentives, vesting, recurring billing, and renewable service payments.

### 5. Choice Model

The initial choice set includes:

> - `Create`

Reviewer: While these are sensible choices on an existing payment stream, one thing that this platform should address is are the workflows (the request, accept) necessary to aggregate necessary authority for the payment stream.

Author: The repo I' building has propose → accept → finalize chains per settlement mode. Will make sure this is taken into consideration thanks

- `Withdraw`
- `Cancel`
- `MutualCancel`
- `Renew`
- `TopUp`
- `Complete`

### 6. Privacy and Authorization

Canton Payment Streams relies on Daml’s native signatory/controller and privacy model:

- **Sender** creates and funds the stream, and can cancel where allowed
- **Recipient** can withdraw accrued funds
- **Observers** can view status where required, for treasury, compliance, or audit use cases

Privacy guarantees:

- stream terms are visible only to signatories and observers
- no global public state exposure of rates, balances, or payment terms
- full auditability remains available to authorized parties

This is a major advantage for institutional and commercially sensitive flows.

### 7. SDK, Dashboard, and Proxy

The project will ship with:

- a TypeScript SDK for create/query/withdraw/cancel/renew/top-up/history flows

> - a thin reference React dashboard

Reviewer 2: Note you might want to build this using the dApp architecture: https://github.com/canton-network/wallet-gateway/tree/main/docs/dapp-building (based on CIP-103)

Author: We already have most of it using this but I'll make sure we align to this while developing. Thanks for this @daravep

> - a small reference proxy for browser-safe deployments

Reviewer: What do you mean by this feature? Specifically, what are you proxying and what makes it browser-safe?

Author: browser-safe is meant in the specific sense of: *credentials and topology that shouldn't be in the browser aren't*, and *each browser-reachable action is bound to a role and a party check*. It's a reference pattern, not a hardened gateway

Reviewer: Thanks.

The full reference stack is published as a release candidate another team can evaluate without one-off setup help.

**Deliverables**
- React reference dashboard and proxy
- documented prefunded and non-prefunded reference flows
- independent smart contract audit or experienced Daml/Canton review
- remediation of material findings
- production-oriented runbooks and deployment documentation
- defined maintenance/support window
- adoption validation tied to named design-partner workflows
- public release candidate suitable for real ecosystem evaluation

---

## Acceptance Criteria

The committee can evaluate completion based on:

- Daml templates implementing the promised stream types and lifecycle
- prefunded settlement and refund behavior working for `CC` and `USDCx`
- non-prefunded / rolling top-up path implemented and documented
- SDK available as a reusable package for create/query/withdraw/cancel/renew/top-up/history flows
- dashboard and reference proxy available for stream creation, monitoring, and withdrawal
- privacy and authorization behavior documented and enforced
- local demo scripts covering the core flows

> - documented Testnet reference flow

Reviewer: Why choose Testnet here as opposed to Mainnet?

Author: I want to launch this as production grade but launching the app on mainnet would make this a service which I'm mindful of as this is intended to be OSS . That said code will always be ready as mainnet. But if you think otherwise happy to discuss and change it

Reviewer: Committing to live use on MainNet would be a stronger commitment, that I encourage.

Deliverables

- at least 5 featured apps integrating Canton Payment Streams in production on Mainnet
- a minimum of 50 active streams running on Mainnet across these integrations over a rolling 30-day window
- external security audit certification with all Critical and High findings remediated and the audit report published
- Apache 2.0 release of the full reference stack including Daml packages, TypeScript SDK, React dashboard, and reference proxy
- final adoption report submitted to the Canton Dev Fund Committee summarizing usage metrics, integrator feedback, and lessons learned

### Milestone 5: Performance-Based Adoption Bonus

A metric-triggered tranche running for 12 months from grant delivery. Disbursed in 100,000 CC increments as on-chain CC burn through Canton Payment Streams crosses each 200,000 CC threshold.

**Acceptance test (per tranche)**
- Cumulative CC burn on transactions exercising Canton Payment Streams template ids exceeds the next 200,000 CC threshold

> - Grantee isw excluded from the qualifying burn count

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Grantee is excluded from the qualifying burn count
- Traffic counted toward this milestone must originate from real usage by users/companies not affiliated with the FTP team.

```
To move to approved needs to have this clause.

Reviewer 3: @deepthi-2531 you good with this addition?

Author: @hythloda  Updated the proposal to match this

---

## Standards Alignment

Canton Payment Streams is designed as a CIP-conformant primitive from day one:

- **CIP-56 (Token Standard) — V1 and V2:** the settlement adapter boundary consumes CIP-56 token interfaces, allowing the stream engine to remain asset-agnostic. V2 support is delivered alongside or shortly after V2 ratification.
- **CIP-103 (dApp API):** all stream lifecycle operations (`Create`, `Withdraw`, `Cancel`, `MutualCancel`, `Renew`, `TopUp`, `Complete`) are exposed through the CIP-103 JSON-RPC surface. Any CIP-103-compliant wallet — including Splice Wallet Kernel implementations and external-party signing wallets — can authorize stream operations without bespoke integration.
- **Wallet SDK alignment:** integrates with `@canton-network/wallet-sdk` as the preferred ledger backend where applicable.

----

## Implementation Mechanics

### 1. Two Streaming Models

The project supports two payment models, matched to different use cases.

#### A. Prefunded Guaranteed-Settlement Streams

In the prefunded model:

> - the sender locks a prefunded balance into a stream escrow at creation time

Reviewer 4: I wonder how you build this on top of CIP-56. You are likely going to have an easier time using committed V2 allocations with iterated settlement, which lands as part of token standard V2: https://lists.sync.global/g/cip-discuss/message/743

Happy to do take a look at your Daml models to learn how the standards are being used; and if I can provide some input based on the experience I gathered as part of my work on splice and the token standards.

Author: @meiersi-da We worked on V2 only as this will be the default going forward. I shared you access to the working repo https://github.com/deepthi-2531/Payment-Streams can you have a look and add your review when you have time. Thanks again for helping out.

Reviewer 4: Ah using V2 I can see how you can make this work. Consider adding your voice to https://lists.sync.global/g/cip-discuss/message/770 so that SV rights owners get this extra datapoint that you are fully depending on the V2 token standard being voted-in in a timely fashion.

Reviewer 4: It looks like you've been using AI to generate a large amount of the code. I've thus time boxed my review time. Some notes:
- CIP-0047 is going to be phased out as soon as CIP-104 goes live. Current ETA is around end of July. The economics will likely also change. Assuming that you always get $1.50 for $0.50 of traffic burn is fragile.
- > someone has to drive Allocation_ExecuteTransfer 
  
  This choice no longer exists in CIP-112.

The whole repo looks like a massive wall of text to me as a human. Consider how to enable humans to answer the following questions:

1. Should I use this?
2. How do I best use this?

Then focus on what's the minimal amount of code to deliver on the answers you want them to make.

Author: @meiersi-da  Thanks this is still WIP so nothing is ready shared repo with you for DAML review. I will tag you once final version is ready so your questions on Should I use this and How do I best use this will be answered in README itself.
